i'm answering a question from a long
time viewer in my audience in this video
someone who is asking me my opinion
about whether or not he should become a
lawyer whether or not he should enroll
in law school
go through the lengthy and arduous
process of becoming
qualified to be a lawyer and he's asking
this not in order to make money
but because he's interested in a kind of
political activism of taking on
a life of greater political
responsibilities because
in his way he wants to make the world a
better place so when answering this
question
i'm partly just making a reply to him
but i'm also going to talk through some
issues
that will pertain to many different
people's decisions
living many different lives in many
different
countries cultures and contexts with
many different aspirations
to make the world a better place all
right the first
puzzle that's wrapped up in this
seemingly simplistic
package like the question should you
become a lawyer it seems simple
it's very easy to lose sight of the fact
that you've combined two different
questions here
all right one is whether or not it's a
good thing
to become a lawyer and the other is even
if it's a bad
thing is it worth doing in order
to make the world a better place you see
that you see the the justification
of going to law school like even if you
don't want to go to law school
you don't want to study the law you're
not interested in law you're not going
to enjoy
the practice of being a lawyer but you
think it's worthwhile
because you have this idea about the
type of political influence and
responsibility you'll have
after being learned you have this idea
of the options and opportunities you'll
have
to make the world a better place and
then that thought
can justify the decision to become a
lawyer
here right now you can confuse these two
and think that what you wanted was to
become a lawyer
and it's not what you wanted was to make
the world a better place what you wanted
was to be some kind of political
activist
and you became a lawyer as a means to
that end right so you've got to really
question these things
separately because for one thing
the process of going to law school of
studying the law and the ways in which
that will change you
that's definite right
the possibility of making the world a
better place
it's quite uncertain isn't it if you're
talking about that as a role the dice
how many lawyers live and work their
whole lives and never accomplish
anything and never change and they never
even have the opportunity to
and in most countries it's different
from place to place after law school
there's a long dehumanizing process of
working low-level jobs
as a lawyer in canada this is referred
to as articling
where you are it might be referred to as
an internship or whatever or clerking
different country but most lawyers who
do become powerful or influential
they only become powerful or influential
when they're more than 60 years old
and it's the end of a long boring
bureaucratic career
playing a very junior and denigrating
role in the establishment
and that's a role maybe some people
would actually desire in and of itself
i've had to deal with a lot of lawyers
in the last five years
i sure wish i had a lawyer who had a
fundamentally helpful
attitude like a customer service
attitude like they're here to help you
like okay you want a divorce i'm going
to explain to you the process i'm going
to answer your question i'm going to
help you get divorced that would be a
great attitude
for a lawyer to have they don't have
that attitude by and large but i mean
many of these people i mean i sympathize
they go into the practice of law and
they don't think of it
as customer service they don't think of
it as being helpful they don't think of
it as educating their clients
they probably don't think of it as a
form of political activism either right
the motivations that are bringing most
people into law school is what you're
going to be sitting next to
in the classroom as a brief digression
i've mentioned this to my girlfriend
many times lately
when i first enrolled in university my
major was
economics and i said to my parents
this is half joking but half serious
criticism
after i came home from class one day i
said only now
do i understand the market for roof and
all
roofing at that time was a notorious
date rate drug
a notorious date rape drug and i was
sitting there
in the classroom with these guys these
guys who chose to go into economics
wow the moral character are the people
i'm sitting with in the classroom like
the people i'm meeting
by majoring in economics this is a whole
depressing side of human nature i've
been blind to
before well in some ways it's going to
be similar in some ways it's going to be
different
you are going to meet people who are
motivated by money
and who are motivated by things far
darker than money
once you're in that law school in the
same way where i was sitting down in
this economics classroom like hey guys
i'm here to study the philosophy of
poverty i'm i'm here i'm interested to
make the world a better place
like at that time specifically i was
interested in questions like
why and how was it possible for south
korea after world war ii
to so rapidly become a highly educated
highly affluent society
with low levels of crime and you know
decent quality architecture running
water and electricity
while other countries remain mired in
third world poverty conditions like what
what worked in korea and what i wanted
to study these kinds of these kinds of
questions i guess what you could call
development economics and i have third
world economics i was interested those
questions within canada
too why were our native people or
indigenous people living in third world
conditions and what we're going to do
about it like okay i'm
here to study the philosophy of poverty
whoa you guys are all here to get rich
quick huh
and you're uh you're willing to do all
kinds of despicable things to get there
okay
that that may be a call for you but
again
i'm trying to just disaggregate here two
very different questions that get
bundled up
right which is the process of education
itself the career itself
the job itself as opposed to this thing
that exists in your mind
to justify to justify committing
yourself
to that process and maybe also the many
years of working in that career
so i i met and spoken to people who said
they wanted to be human rights lawyers
and then they got a lot less interested
when they figured out that oh first you
just got to be a lawyer
and then when you're in your 50s you
start doing human rights law like they
have to have a whole lifetime
of doing just property law resolving
disputes they have no interest in
this terrible bureaucratic grind and
then once they've distinguished
themselves as a lawyer once they've made
enough money not even for themselves
they've made enough money for a
corporation or a partnership that
employs these lawyers then they're able
to move on to do something there
they're supposedly addressing themselves
and they they switch out of they realize
human rights law is not
what they want to do at all if their
concern is human rights they're gonna
have to find another path
to get there and
my second my second major point of view
i want to want to put this question to
you okay
um who has more
political influence in the world
right now the documentary
filmmaker michael moore
or this lawyer you imagine yourself
becoming
10 years from now and i say 10 years
intentionally
because you will probably be a powerless
paper pusher 10 years from now even if
again 20 years and 30 years from now
maybe you do become a powerful and
influential person through the price
michael moore is not particularly
intelligent
really really michael moore is not
particularly intelligent
he's not particularly well read he's not
intellectual
what amazing political power and
influence
he's amassed in his life what a
tremendous potential he has
to make the world a better place or a
different place or to influence politics
he's managed to achieve through
documentary filmmaking
and you know what i don't really think
michael moore is the exception to the
rule
in the 21st century i think he's the
rule i think that's the norm
now all right um
now you could ask a second question what
if michael moore
had gone to law school and become a
lawyer
yes she'd be even more influential he'd
be even more effective there's no doubt
what if michael moore after his second
or third hit movie
because he had he had a gap of years
during these movies he had movies and tv
shows
what if he had stopped and said okay
he's going to take a couple years and go
to law school
and then come back great question great
question
and you could ask what if michael moore
had gone to law school before his
filmmaking career started i think for
him financially that would have been
impossible
basically knows what right but
what really is the route for you to take
if in this sense you want to be a
politically powerful and influential
person
and you don't want to do it through
organized crime you don't want to do it
through real estate
apparently right you want to be
respected for your
ideas your opinion your research maybe
your critique of what's wrong with
political condition like it's something
like this that you have in mind
implicitly
you've got to disambiguate it for
yourself what is it you want to be
respected for
i'm not saying to you that being a
lawyer is incompatible with that
um i'm saying that
being a lawyer might be much more
irrelevant
to that than you're that you're willing
to admit to yourself
right even if being a lawyer becoming
alert could augment that
now i'm not gonna digress into it but
it's remarkable that i hear
so many interviews with people who
became lawyers and never practiced the
law
or became lawyers very briefly practice
the law and then quit
in order to do something else entirely
to become a political commentator
uh megan kelly is an example on the
right wing
and jane guiger the host of young turks
is example on the left wing
they both they're fully qualified
lawyers and they very briefly
pushed paperwork around in the law
office and decided whoa this is not for
me this is not how i'm going to earn a
living
and they went into broadcasting
political commentary
doing something similar to what i do now
frankly here on youtube
um today megyn kelly hosts a podcast
after she lost her job on
network television repeatedly shout out
to megan kelly
you know now it's
worth questioning for these people
could they have attained their goals and
and could they have become better people
also to be blunt if they'd had more
clarity of purpose
from day one and take in a root more
like michael moore if they'd been more
of a creative
person in some sense and why do i raise
the question of what kind of what kind
of person there
it changes you i'm not going to digress
into this i've had many many videos
talking about
if you join the military for five years
it changes you if you go to law school
and then do the articling i think five
years is a conservative estimate in most
countries it might be more like an eight
year process
varies from country to country but let's
just say if you spend five years doing
this this lawyer thing
it changes you and maybe you can tell me
that in some ways it's going to make you
a better person and you know what there
are some ways it's going to it's going
to make you worse
all right another really interesting
example from
my perspective is actually the guy who
does tmz
or tmz um you know a celebrity gossip
station but he started he was a
conventional learner every so often in
his
job being a entertainment talk show host
he makes references to specific laws
that show that he does have that
that legal education okay now
my third and final point in this video
because i think this question should you
become a lawyer
it involves these three points
that may be difficult to extricate and
analyze separately in your own mind
it comes down to a question of your
analysis of your perspective on
your own culture and how you fit into
that culture
to what extent you're a dissident in
that culture to what extent you're a
conformist
the particular guy asking me this
question he's writing to me from ireland
all right i really do think that the
decision to become a lawyer
is profoundly different for an irishman
born and raised in ireland than it is
for a canadian
born and raised in canada and if that's
hard for you to visualize
how would you feel about becoming a
lawyer
in iran if you're born and raised
iranian yeah how would you feel right
now about being a lawyer
in iraq in post-american occupation
iraq well it's a way to make the world a
better place
right it's a way to right and now you're
a part of that
political establishment in iraq one of
the biggest problems they have
is of the police abducting people
holding them as hostages and demanding
ransom money all right you think you're
a powerful person as a lawyer
in some ways you're quite powerless in
some ways
you're much more powerless than a
filmmaker like like michael moore
all right so i think that suffices for
this video
um i do think that social media
is simultaneously um underappreciated
and exaggerated in its political
importance
and the wonderful thing about
pursuing a creative path to becoming
politically influential trying to be
someone like michael moore
is that it doesn't exclude other
interests other passions
other careers you know probably you
could be a filmmaker like that
while going to medical school while
while going to uh
business school gaining credentials in
commerce and finance or while
uh studying the law it's it's impossible
and again it would be possible to be
someone like michael moore but he also
uh has a law degree but when you are
looking
at your own culture let's just look at
the last 50 years
of history in the in the english
speaking world and you ask
who has made a difference and who has
the potential
to make a difference now maybe the
saddening sickening truth is
that it really is people like megyn
kelly
maybe that's hard for us to admit to
ourselves because we'd like to believe
there's a meritocracy
whereby it's the it's the people who
have these credentials
uh or even the people who are elected
you know
who who really matter but you know there
are 10
000 anonymous lawyers toiling
filling out time sheets for billable
hours doing
meaningless bureaucratic work and
elected politicians come and go
and they seem to change almost nothing
certainly in all the societies i've
lived in
in the in the history the chapter of
history i've lived through so little
change comes that way and yes i don't
think
it's an exception to the rule i think
it's the rule
to point to someone like michael moore
who distinguishes themselves
who earns the trust and respect of their
audience then moves on to earn the
admiration of millions
anyways the real potential to make a
difference in this world